In April 2014 two Dutch girls, Kris Kremers and Lisanne Froon, disappeared while hiking the Pianista trail in Boquete, Panama. A trail which took them to the top of the Mirador, a mountain which is part of the continental divide.
In previous videos we discussed various theories about what may have happened to the girls, but recent studies and expeditions have resulted in new data, which indicates that what actually happened to the girls is unlike anything anyone ever envisioned.
21 year old Kris Kremers and 22 year old Lisanne Froon arrived in Boquete on March 29, after previously having attended a Spanish language school at Bocas del Torro on the Pacific coast.
The two girls are planning to do volunteer work at a child daycare center in Boquete, but shortly after they arrive they are told that the daycare has no place for further volunteers and they will have to wait for several days before other volunteer work can be found.
Badly disappointed by this setback, the girls decide to make the best of their stay at Boquete by undertaking some hikes in the surrounding area.
'We are going to see a waterfall,' Lisanne writes enthusiastically to some friends in a message a day before they set off. But there are no waterfalls along the Pianista trail.
So how well were the girls prepared for their hike? And were they truly planning to take the Pianista trail? Over the years many attempts have been made to find an exact copy of the brochure Lisanne is studying in the pictures of the day before their hike, but nobody has ever found the exact same publication.
There are several trails leading to waterfalls at Boquete, and from their browser data we know the Kris and Lisanne studied these trails, so were they originally planning to take one of these hikes, changing their mind at the last moment?
According to friends and family, Lisanne had the habit of very carefully preparing everything she did.
So, if the girls were planning to take the Pianista trail, then surely Lisanne would have studied maps and all information she could find. But what if they originally prepared for another trail?
We know that, before setting off on their fatal hike, the girls visited the language school in the early morning of April 1, but we do not know at what exact time they arrived there and who they met or spoke to that morning.
In her latest blog post on her website, Scarlet finds some important inconsistencies between statements made by various persons at this language school.
Did the girls discuss their plans with anyone, and was the Pianista trail mentioned at that time? Sadly, none of this is completely clear from the various statements.
What we also don't know is how the girls reached the trail, and whether they started their hike at the Pianista restaurant, or a bit further on at the small bridge where they made their first pictures that day.
Although several taxi drivers claimed to have driven the girls to the trail, none of their statements matched the description of the girls or the clothes they were wearing.
Despite their inexperience, Kris and Lisanne made very good progress though, starting their hike around 11:00 and reaching the top of the Mirador two hours later.
The weather on the Pacific side was clear and sunny that day, and the girls were in high spirits when they reached the top of the Mirador around one in the afternoon, celebrating their achievement with a series of enthusiast selfies.
Although most tourists turn back at the top of the Mirador, the trail itself continues, descending into the dense tropical cloud forest on the Atlantic slopes.
At the top of the Mirador, Lisanne opened the google maps application on her phone, studying the map before closing the application again. This may indicate that there was some discussion among the girls on which route they should take on their way down. But although google maps showed the top of the Mirador, it would not have shown the trail itself, and it may not have provided the girls with the information they searched for.
If Lisanne had prepared everything as extensively as she used to do, she would have known that the northerly route would only take them down into dense cloud forest, but if she originally prepared to visit one of the waterfalls she may not have been sufficiently up to date on the Pianista trail.
Perhaps the girls were confused by the fact that the trail continued beyond the top of the Mirador, or maybe they were just curious what lay ahead, but there are indications something else was at stake.
After the Mirador, the images Lisanne takes seem to change. There are no more selfies, and only Kris appears in some of the pictures, apparently leading the way and walking quite far ahead of Lisanne.
In one of these images, Kris gives a mock salute at Lisanne, while sticking out her tongue.
One hour after the top of the Mirador, in their final image, Kris is far ahead of Lisanne and her stance as well as facial impression seem to register impatience, as if she is in a lot of hurry and eager to press on along the trail.
But why would Kris be in such a hurry if they knew that the trail was taking them nowhere and they would have to walk the whole route back later?
When we zoom in on image 507 we can see clear stains of mud on Kris her lower legs.
Perhaps more importantly, there is a dark stain on the back of her shorts, which is not visible in any of the images which were taken earlier.
When we compare this stain with the image of the recovered shorts there is an exact match with a large tear in the fabric, which almost certainly was the result of a sliding fall.
It will take considerable force though, to create such a tear in the denim shorts. If Kris fell hard enough to cause such damage to her shorts, this must have hurt badly!
So, could it be that Kris is in a hurry because she is in pain, and eager to get back to their lodgings quickly?
Because we know the times and the locations where the various daylight pictures were taken, we can calculate the speed with which the girls moved between the photo stops.
This calculation shows that after the Mirador they walked downhill at a brisk 1.7 kilometers per hour, however between image 506 and 507 they slowed down considerably, arriving at the first stream about 10 minutes late.
What happened during these missing ten minutes? Could it be that Kris lost her footing on the steep shore of the first stream, sliding down and damaging her shorts when striking one of the many rough stones?
If there was an accident even before they made their last daylight pictures, this would definitely change the mood, and it could explain why they were in a hurry to get back to their lodging, no longer bothering with taking pictures.
But surely, if they were in a hurry to get back to Boquete, they would have turned back? Or could it be that they thought it did not matter in what direction they were heading as long as they went down hill?
For those of us who have studied this case for years and years, it is easy to forget though that Kris and Lisanne were in a very different situation, possibly without any real map of the area or knowledge of the terrain they were heading into.
To them, any route that went downhill may have seemed like a good choice.
Sadly, we may never know what caused the girls to take the northerly route, but there is little doubt it was the start of a slowly escalating series of mishaps.
Winding through deep trenches and very dense tropical cloud forest, the trail descends to the valley for the first stream, before climbing up again to the paddocks.
After crossing the main river at the first cable bridge, the trail eventually leads to the village of Alto Romero, and onward to the Pacific coast, a journey of several days.
Dressed in shorts and sleeveless shirts, and carrying only one small backpack with a few bottles of water and snacks, the girls definitely weren't prepared for a hike into this type of terrain.
However, as long as they stayed on the trail there was no immediate danger.
Around two in the afternoon, the last daylight pictures found on their camera are taking, image 507 and 508, which show Kris crossing a small stream. This is the last firm location we have of both girls.
2.5 hours later, at 16:39, an attempt was made to call the Dutch alarm number 112 on Kris her iPhone, and not long afterward a similar call was attempted on Lisanne her Samsung phone. Both calls failed though, as the girls were far outside mobile phone coverage.
In the next few days several more attempts are made to call the alarm number, often at very long intervals, before they change to a pattern where the phone are only switched on for a very short period twice a day, apparently to check the time.
The last time the iPhone is activated is on April 11, ten days after their disappearance.
One week after their disappearance, in the very early morning of April 8, a series of one hundred flashlight pictures are taken, most probably in an attempt to use the camera flash for signalling.
As mentioned in earlier videos, we used these night pictures to construct a 3D model of the location the pictures were taken. This shows they were on a steep slope, surrounded by large boulders, several meters above a fast flowing river.
Sadly, despite extensive searches, the girls were never found, and ten weeks after their disappearance a few of their remains as well as their backpack with camera and phones, were found far down stream near the village of Alto Romero.
We do not know what happened after they took these last two pictures, but we can make some deductions based on where their remains were found and the data retreived from the camera and phones.
Kris and Lisanne crossed the continental divide near the top of the Mirador, about two hours after they started their hike along the Pianista trail.
Small streams and gullies in this area carry the water from the slopes down into the Culebra river, where the remains of the girls were found.
Although the last known location of the girls is still close to the Mirador, their remains and belongings were found about 25 kilometers down stream near the village of Alto Romero.
Kris her shorts were found close to the 2nd cable bridge, which marks the furthest point the girls may have reached.
Within this area there are several isolated cabins, although most of these are only occasionally inhabited by locals.
A network of trails connects these cabins and the various paddocks, however none of these local trails are regularly maintained and most of them are very hard to find.
Although 508 is the last known daylight image, it is likely that one more image was taken, as file number 509 is missing. This could have been either an image or a video which somehow failed to be written to the memory card.
Several members of the Reddit community have been able to accurately reproduce a similar failure with a duplicate of this camera, which indicate that after image 508 the camera most likely either fell or became wet, causing the memory card malfunction. This might be an indication of some kind of accident happening after the last daylight image.
In previous videos we assumed that such an accident most likely happened at the second stream crossing, an idyllic place where Lisanne surely would have tried to make a picture or video.
Such an accident would explain the camera failure and why no further images were taken that day, and it might even explain the fractured metatarsal bones in Lisanne her foot.
However an accident at the second stream does not explain why the girls would have left the trail.
If they turned back at the 2nd stream crossing, the girls would have reached the top of the Mirador long before the time of their first alarm calls. But at the top of the Mirador, they would have regained phone signal, which never happened.
This implies the girls must have left the trail somewhere, but passing through the dense vegetation is next to impossible and an accident is unlikely.
As we showed in previous video's there are some places in this area which closely resemble the night location. But to reach any of these places, the girls must have left the trail, and why would they do so?
If they accidentally fell down one of the slopes, they would either be able to climb back up, or they would be too badly injured and hampered by the dense vegetation to make any progress, in which case they surely would have been found.
And if they turned back too late, unable to make it back before dark, they could have continued in darkness by the light of the phones.
Or worst case, they could just sit down beside the trail and wait for sunrise. It would be a harrowing experience, but risks of anything bad happening to them would still be very low.
In all of these situations, leaving the trail makes absolutely no sense, and due to the dense vegetation it is next to impossible to accidentally move away from the trail, even in darkness.
A further problem is that all of these areas are too far away from the places where remains and belongings of the girls were found, and it seems unlikely their backpack and its contents could have survived passing down the many waterfalls and rapids on that route.
The more streams and rivers we map with the drones, the more waterfalls we see, several of them falling down ten or more meters.
Surely, if the backpack encountered one or more of these waterfalls on its journey, the camera, phones, and sunglasses would have been smashed to pieces!
The fiercest waterfall is just a few hundred meters upstream of the location where Kris her shorts were found.
There is absolutely no way the backpack could have avoided this waterfall, unless it entered the river close to the place where the shorts were found, but if the backpack fell down this waterfall, surely the camera, phones, and sunglasses would have been severely damaged?
A similar reasoning applies to the remains of the girls. Surely, if they perished somewhere high up the slopes, their remains would have been found all along the shores of the various streams and rivers on the way down.
But despite extensive searches, the only places were remains were found are downstream of the second cable bridge, where Kris her shorts were found.
In the months and years following the tragedy, many different teams searched the shores of the streams on the upper slopes, but no remains were ever found upstream of the second cable bridge.
If the night location was anywhere on the higher slopes, surely something would have been found upstream of the second cable bridge!
This implies that Kris and Lisanne must have walked a considerable distance, but without any gear it is impossible to make any progress through the dense vegetation and rough terrain of the Atlantic slopes, unless one follows a trail or a stream.
Inexperienced, and dressed in frail clothes without any gear, the two girls truly had no other option but to stay on the trail.
On April 8, 2014, one week after the girls disappeared, one of the local guides confirms this, adding that the only risk is that the girls walked too far along the trail.
In their documentary 'Answers for Kris' the parents of Kris Kremers reach a similar conclusion. The girls would not have left the trail.
It is clear to us
We do not believe she left the trail
She would not be so stupid
You really have to make an effort to get lost here, and they would not do that.
If they became injured they surely would have stayed on the trail.
There are no steep slopes along the trail where you can fall down without being found.
It is good to have walked the trail and seen it with our own eyes that you can truly not get off this trail.
The only thing you do when you think it is getting too late is to turn back, and if you get stuck in darkness than you wait for sunrise, but you stay on the trail.
By far the most likely scenario is that Kris and Lisanne kept following the trail.
Sadly, we may never know for certain why they did not turn back. Although it seems unlikely, there is a chance they thought the trail was a loop and would take them back to Boquete, but it is also possible they were intend on reaching a certain place and refused to admit defeat by turning back early.
The power logs on Kris her iPhone show that this phone was accessed regularly after passing the first stream, almost certainly for time checks, indicating that Kris was keeping track of time while hurrying along the trail.
As the phones were inside their backpack, the fact that Kris her phone was checked, as well as the fact that the first alarm call was made by Kris her phone, indicates that after the firt stream, Kris took over the backpack. With Kris walking ahead and Lisanne lagging quite some distance behind, this also meant that Lisanne did not have further access to the camera, which was also in the backpack. This might be an alternative explanation as to why no further pictures were taken.
At 16:30, the Sun disappeared behind the western mountains, and although they still had about two hours till sunset there is no doubt that the diminishing light due to the shadow of the mountains was clearly noticeable.
The fact that the first alarm call is made almost immediately after the sun disappeared behind the mountains is a clear sign that Kris and Lisanne suddenly became aware that they had walked too far along the trail and there was insufficient time remaining to get back to the trail head before sunset.
If they had turned back earlier, and were only slightly delayed, they could have walked back the last part of the trail in darkness, or by the light of their mobile phones, but if they were somewhere close to the main river there was no hope their phone batteries would survive long enough to provide them with light all of the way back.
From this moment on it was inevitable that they had to spend the night somewhere along the trail, and when their two alarm calls did not connect, they must have realized that they had less than two hours left to reach some safe location.
Turning back at this moment would not be much use, as there was nothing but dark forest and deep trenches behind them, but if the girls studied maps and images of the trail at the language school they may well have known that there was a shelter and several farm houses beyond the first cable bridge, on the northern shore of the river.
If Kris and Lisanne kept walking at the same steady pace they had been making before the first stream, skipping all further photo stops, then their first alarm call must have been made on an open field, which is sometimes revered to as the second paddock.
According the local guides, this is the first place where the girls may have had trouble following the trail, as the path is often difficult to find among the many cow trails. This may have played a part in their alarm calls.
Beyond this field is the Culebra river, the same river along the shores of which the remains and belongings of the girls were found several months later.
If Kris and Lisanne studied maps and pictures of the trail, they must have known about this river, and it is possible they originally planned to turn back at this point, underestimating how long it would take them to reach this place.
This late in the afternoon though, turning back was no longer an option, as it would cause them to get stranded for the night in very dense forest or in some narrow trench.
The best they could do was to make for the shelter on the other shore of the river.
The traveler is supposed to cross this river via a so called monkey bridge, an extremely dangerous contraption consisting of three metal wires connecting both shores.
During an interview in the summer of 2014, guide Feliciano keeps the option open that the girls may have drowned while trying to cross the river via the cable bridge.
However, the Dutch pathologist Frank van der Goot , who investigated the case on behalve of the parents, is very clear in his opinion that Kris and Lisanne would never have used such a dangerous contraption.
Given the very low water levels at the time, most locals agree that Kris and Lisanne would have had no need to use the cable bridge, and could have passed the river easily by jumping from one boulder on to the next.
However, the big difference is that the locals know the right spot to cross the river, while Kris and Lisanne almost certainly did not.
So, there is a big chance they spend considerable time searching for the best spot to cross, or perhaps became injured during an attempt to cross at the wrong spot.
Given that the time of the first alarm call matches with the time the girls would have reached the river, it is not impossible that the calls were also caused by their struggle to find a route across.
In that case, the fact that there were no further calls after the second call might indicate they successfully found a way across the river, reaching the safety of the shelter on the other shore.
If there was some kind of incident while crossing the river, this may explain the fact that the camera apparently fell and became wet, and it may even explain the fractured metatarsal bones in Lisanne her foot and the tears in Kris her shorts.
It is not likely though that the girls perished near the first bridge, or that the night location is anywhere in this area, as in such a scenario surely some remains or belongings of the girls would have been found between the first and second bridge.
If they managed to safely cross the river, they would have reached another open field and a partly collapsed shelter which is known as the Refugio.
We do not know if the termite nest which was found inside in January 2015 was already there in April 2014, but given the rapidly deminishing light it is highly unlikely the girls had any time left to search for some other shelter.
The fact that the girls switched off both their phones are 17:52, just half an hour before sunset, indicates they must have reached a place they considered safe enough to spend the night.
Most likely they spend the first night either inside the Refugio, or in the long grass on the open paddock outside.
The next morning however, they attempt another alarm call on Lisanne her S3 phone immediately after sunrise, indicating something is definitely not right.
There are some indications that the northerly winds resulted in dense fog on the lower slopes in the late afternoon of April 1 and morning of April 2, and this may have been one of the reasons for the alarm calls, but most likely the main reason was indicision on what to do next.
Surely, if some life threatening situation had developed during the night, Kris and Lisanne would have switched on their phones and made instant alarm calls or other signs of distress, but the phones were only switched on at sunrise.
So, the situation was not instantly life threatening, and could wait till daylight.
But if everything was well, there would be no need for alarm calls, as they would have lots of time to walk back to Boquete via the Mirador, a journey which should take them around 5 hours.
It seems unlikely the girls were still under the impression that the trail was a loop, but even if there were doubts the most logical choice would still be to take the long way back by retracing their steps.
But what if going back via the Mirador was not an option? As mentioned earlier there is a chance the girls became injured during their risky crossing of the river.
In such a situation, climbing up the steep slopes of the Mirador and walking for five hours or more along the narrow and muddy slopes might not have been possible.
If the girls were unable to return via the Mirador in the morning of April 2, then this would be a valid reason for their calls at sunrise.
Independent of the real reason for their alarm calls though, the fact that they called immediately on sunrise allows us to pinpoint their location, for in the mountaineous region the Sun does not become visible everywhere at the same time, and at the time of their first alarm call on April 2, large parts of the area were still in darkness.
Only in the white coloured regions of the shade map, the sun would be visible to the caller at the time of the first alarm call on April 2. If the girls called as soon as the sun became visible, they must have been in one of these white area's.
If we assume that the relaxed behavior of the girls during their first night indicates they spend the night somewhere in a cabin or shed, then the shades map showes there are only two places in reach of the girls where they would have seen sunrise at the time of the first alarm call on April 2.
The first of these places is a storage shed on the smaller paddock, a place which no longer exists but which was easy to reach and visible from the trail.
Although such a location matches with several scenario's, it is hard to explain why the girls would not have been able to walk back via the Mirador, and how their backpack reached its final location near Alto Romero.
The only other safe shelter which was in reach for the girls, and from which sunrise would have been visible at the time of the first alarm call on April 2, is the Refugio near the first cable bridge.
This location matches with our proposed scenario, in which the girls kept following the trail, crossing the river at the first bridge.
Although there are two cabins to the north of the Refugio for whom the same would apply, these are hard to find and it is next to impossible Kris and Lisanne could have reached these before sunset.
Any other scenario would apply that the girls spend the first night out in the open, in any of the white area's, however it is hard to believe they would have switched off their phones during the whole night if they were somewhere out in the jungle.
The alarm calls continue with large intervals all through the morning of April 2, indicating Kris and Lisanne most probably stayed at or near the Refugio and the first cable bridge, hoping for rescue.
But when there was no sign of other travelers, and the fog somewhat lifted, they must have decided to continue along the trail in the hope of reaching one of the farmhouses.
Several of the guides were selling hikes along the Pianista trail with an overnight stay in one of the houses in the Alto Romero region, and it is very well possible Kris and Lisanne had heard or read about this, so they may have known there was a village further down the trail.
If they were injured and unable to return via the Mirador, it is likely they decided to head for these farm houses for help.
From the Refugio it is less than 2 kilometers to the nearest farm house, just past the second cable bridge, and even if they were injured the girls should have been able to cross this distance in just a few hours.
Staying mostly near the top of a ridge and high above the river, this part of the trail is easy to follow, with little risk of an accident.
However just before the second bridge, the trail goes steeply down, before making a sharp turn and following the river for a few hundred meters before reaching the second bridge.
It is unlikely the girls were aware of the presence of a second cable bridge when they set off on their journey, and if they were injured this surely became an impassable barrier.
Unlike the first bridge, the current at the second bridge is too strong and the distance between the boulders too big to wade across or jump from stone to stone. There is no other option but to pass via the bridge, which would be impossible if the girls were injured.
The answer to what happened next is hidden in a discovery which was made just upstream of the second cable bridge.
Kris her shorts were found entangled in some driftwood and rocks near the eastern shore of the Culebra river, so on the opposite shore from where the trail runs, a few hundred meters upstream of the second cable bridge.
This is firm proof that Kris and Lisanne crossed the river upstream of the second cable bridge, almost certainly by wading across or jumping from one boulder to the next.
But there is more, for if we zoom in on the exact location where Kris her shorts were found than we notice that this is not directly along the shore of the river, but about 40 meters inland, along a small stream which flows into the river, and right below a waterfall.
But that means the shorts can not have reached this location by floating down the river! They must have drifted down from higher up this stream, above the waterfal!
And if the shorts came down this stream, then almost certainly the backpack and the remains also floated down this stream into the river, meaning the night location is somewhere higher up this stream, above the first waterfall.
When we check the flow of this stream, it finally becomes clear why Kris and Lisanne crossed the river at this exact spot, and what their plan was. For if we follow the little valley upstream it leads us direct to the nearest farms! A perfect short-cut!
Afraid to cross the river at the second cable bridge, and with time rapidly running out, the girls designed a route which would lead them not only safely across the river, but straight to their destination!
In April 2014 this stream was most probably dry, and in the fading light it may have appeared like a trail to the girls, as they searched for a route to the farms above.
When the water levels are low, the place where the shorts were found is probably the best location to cross the river for those who do not wish to use the cable bridge, however it remains very risky.
Most of all, this place can easily become a trap once the rains start, as they did on April 3, as the water in this river is known to rise by two meters in just a few hours during the rainy season, causing a traveler to become stranded on the eastern shore with no way back.
Most likely injured and cut off from the trail by the rising water, the girls probably spend days climbing up the steep slopes of the eastern shore, only to become stuck halfway up some nearly dry, stepped waterfall.
If the girls perished at, or very close to, the spot where Kris her shorts were found, this would instantly solve the mystery of the backpack and the remains, as there are no further waterfalls or other obstacles between here and Alto Romero, just a wide, fast flowing, river.
Anything that falls into the water near the second cable bridge will be carried along by the current to Alto Romero, and this is such a short journey that even a frail backpack would effortly survive it, with its contents almost certainly still intact.
A night location just upstream of the 2nd bridge would perfectly explain how and why the backpack and the remains ended up on the river shores near alto romero, and why nothing was ever found upstream of the location of Kris her shorts.
The other argument has to do with the size and shape of the boulders.
We see a lot of big boulders in the night pictures, several of them measuring 2 till 3 meters in size. Although such boulders can occasionally be found on the higher slopes, the only place where there truly is an abundance of them is at the Culebra river itself.
Once again, this points to a location on the lower slopes, at or very near to the Culebra river.
The final indication is the extensive study of camera temperatures which was done by Imperfect Plan, where they concluded that temperature at the night location was consistent with a low altitude, such as that found near the second cable bridge.
On the higher slopes, close to the first stream, temperatures at night can sometimes go down to less than ten degrees Celcius. Given their frail clothes, there is little chance the girls would have survived for long if they were high up the slopes, but near the 2nd cable bridge temperatures would be far more benign.
For many years though, this location remained just one of many possible locations, but then something came to light which suddenly turned it into the prime candidate for the night location.
Although most agree the night pictures were a byproduct of using the camera flash for signalling, nobody has ever found any real explanation what could have caused the girls to start this sequence at such a late hour, when very few people could be expected to notice them.
Search lights and flares have been proposed, but although there were search teams active that night, there is no evidence any of these teams was located on the Atlantic slopes, and most of all why would they launch flares only at 01:30 in the night and not earlier?
Nevertheless, the girls must have seen something, which made them respond with the camera flash, and the real cause became finally clear when we took a look at the moon.
On the 8th of April 2014, the moon set at 01:30 in the morning, while image 510, the first of the night pictures was taken at 01:29:42, just 18 seconds before moonset!
This coincidence was too close to ignore, but it seemed unlikely the girls actually saw the moon set, as there would be various hills and ridges in between, and confusing the moon with a search light seemed unlikely.
But in the very humid atmosphere of the cloud forest, a bright moon setting behind some distant hill, is the perfect environment for crepuscular rays or moon rays, which will appear like bright beams of light, rising up in the air and moving slowly back and forth during the last few minutes of moonset.
It seems highly likely that this is exactly what Kris and Lisanne saw that night. Not the moon itself, but moon rays, caused by the moon setting behind a distant hill. To them, these would appear like search lights, and in their despair they instantly responded with their camera flash.
In a very very sad twist of fate, they were signalling at the moon.
Nobody noticed their feeble camera flash, and nobody ever responded.
But by finding the cause of their camera flashes, we can finally pinpoint their location, for we know they aimed their camera just to the left of the forked tree, and we also know that the moon was setting in a direction of 285 degrees. So we now finally know how the whole panorama is oriented!
The discovery that the girls were aiming their camera toward the west instantly disables all our previous locations along Rio Mamei and the Belt area, which are all facing East or North!
If the girls were aiming the camera toward the setting moon, then they can not have been in any of the previously suspected night locations!
However, there is a perfect match with our location just upstream of the 2nd cable bridge! Not only is this little valley resembling our 3D model, but it is also one of the few locations which are pointing exactly in the right direction!
If Kris and Lisanne were trapped at this location in the very early morning of April 8, 2014, they would have seen moon rays sweeping across the sky on the opposite shore of the river, right where they knew the trail was located.
No doubt they had been waiting for just such an event for day after day. Their SOS sign is pointing at the opposite shore of the river, and they must have been using their signal mirror for the same purpose, pointing it to the opposite shore, where they knew the trail was located.
It has often been said that the girls probably thought they knew their location, they did not feel lost, and this theory confirms this. Their only mistake is that, in order to avoid the cable bridge, they waded across the river at the wrong spot, causing them to become trapped on the opposite shore.
So, they waited, day after day, almost within sight of the trail, desperately trying to attract the attention of locals passing by on the opposite shore, but their voices could not be heard above the roar of the river water, and nobody expected the two girls at this location. There were searches being arranged, but they were far outside the search area.
On April 3, the weather changed, and when the first rain fell the water level in the river quickly rose and locals stopped using the trail, ending the only hope the girls had left of being found.
Stuck in one location far outside mobile phone coverage, Kris and Lisanne quickly gave up further attempts to call the alarm services, making their last two calls in the morning of April 3.
But although they stopped making calls, they kept using their phones and in the afternoon of April 3 they checked the phone number of their Panamenian host Miriam in the adresbook of their phone, without making any attempt to call this number.
There is only one logical explanation for such behavior, and that is that they wrote a message, explaining their situation and asking the finder to call Miriam, who would certainly know what to do.
From their earlier images we know the girls carried at least two water bottles with them, but only one of these was found in their backpack, so it seems very likely that the other bottle was used to float a message down the river, in the hope that someone would find it.
If the girls were indeed stuck in a position just upstream of the second cable bridge, they would know that there were farms downstream of their location, and floating one of more messages down the river with the phone number of Miriam would be a logical thing to do!
Sadly, if they did indeed float one or more bottles with messages down the river, none of these were ever found.
We know the girls tore their tourist brochure apart, and parts of this they may have used for their messages, while other parts were used to create an SOS sign on one of the boulders facing the opposite shore.
There is another indication as well that the girls carried a pencil or ballpoint with them, even if this was never found.
On April two at 13:50 Lisanne her S3 phone is started for less than a minute, without making any calls. By that time the girls were almost certainly already stuck at the night location, and this is the first of many such very short phone checks. After the S3 battery runs out, these checks are mostly done with the iPhone and always on more or less fixed times of the day, in the morning around 10:20 and in the afternoon around 14:00.
For years, the general story was that these were checks for phone signal, but that is impossible. In most cases, the phone is started up for such a short period that there is insufficient time for its receiver to check for a signal, and besides what use would it be to check for signal strength at the same time each day?
Another theory is that these were the times when the Sun was visible at their location, or the times when they stopped and started walking, but what use would it be to record these times and why start up the phone? It does not make much sense either.
Due to a screendump which was automatically made by the operating system, we now know that the girls used the clock application during these short activations, indicating these were almost certainly time checks. As the iPhone was still on Dutch time, they used the clock application to check for the local time in Panama.
But why would you wish to know the Panamanian time twice a day? The answer may be hidden in another equally sad story. When Chris McCandless became stranded in the wilderness of Alaska he fanatically kept a diary, writing on the walls of his bus and any piece of paper he could find. Each entry he started with a date and a time and the most important thing he kept writing down was his stock of food. How much had he left, and how much did he consume?
People are always asking why Kris and Lisanne did not write anything down, and the simple answer is that they most probably did, but these notes were never found and most probably washed down the river long ago.
When you are stuck in the jungle, careful stock keeping becomes of vital importance. We know that, when they started on the hike, they carried at least one can of Pringles with them, and probably some other snacks. We do not know if they managed to find any food in the jungle, but it seems very likely that twice a day they counted their remaining stock, carefully writing down how much was remaining and how much each of them took, to avoid any risk of either of them cheating on the other. And each entry started with a date and a time, for which they used the phone.
Their time checks stop on April 6 for the simple reason that on that day their food ran out, and there was nothing left to record. They tore up the empty pringles can and used its reflecting bottom as a signalling mirror, while the carton was used together with the other paper to construct the SOS sign.
We don't know what happened during their final days. They may have drowned, during a final desperate attempt to wade back across the river, or hypothermia and despair may have become fatal. We will never know, and probably it is better that way. May they rest in peace.
Today, their story serves as a warning how even on a relatively simple hike a few small, and very understandable, mistakes can become fatal. Never leave on a hike without telling others about your exact plans, and always carry a whistle, warm and watertight clothes, a compass and a detailed map with you, as well as emergency rations, and first aid gear.